         Protect - A Hard Disk Write Protect Utility

1. Legal Stuff.

    Protect is free software.  Binary, source, and documentation 
placed into the public domain 12 December 1992.

THERE IS NO WARRANTY.  Protect is provided 'As is', without 
warranty of any kind.

PLEASE, DON'T ASK FOR SUPPORT OR WARRANTY PROTECTION.  THE SOURCE 
IS PROVIDED.  THAT'S ALL I CAN DO.


2. Introduction.

     Protect write protects fixed disks on IBM XT/AT and 
compatible computers running DOS.  Protect is a software emulator 
of the write protect tabs used on removable disks.  All software 
that can't write to a write protected floppy disk can't write to 
a Protected hard disk.  Protect works by trapping disks accesses 
at the BIOS level and filtering out those which change the data 
on protected disk(s).
     Protect has many uses.  One is to test software.  Any 
program that does not need to write to the hard disk should work 
with Protect on.  If it doesn't, it may contain a virus or Trojan 
Horse.
     Protect can also be used to test programs that need to write 
to the hard disk.  Many programs can be told through parameters 
or setup routines to write only to floppy disks.  Protect can be 
used to verify a program writes only where it is supposed to 
write.
     Another application for Protect is safeguarding sensitive 
information.  Sensitive information should not be placed on a 
fixed disk (unless it is possible to lock up the whole computer).  
Even if files are deleted, they can retrieved, using utility 
packages.  Data may be erased by copying over it many times, but 
to be sure, the whole disk must be erased (see below).  Erasing 
is nuisance; plus, it is easy to lose data if backups are not 
made.
     Why must the *whole* disk be erased?  Many applications, 
such as spreadsheets and word processors must be run from a hard 
disk; they will not fit on a floppy.  These same applications 
often use work files, to store data temporarily.  There is no way 
to know where the temporary files were once the application is 
exited, except by searching the disk for them.  Again, very 
inconvenient.
     Protect can be used to prevent temporary files from being 
placed on a hard disk.  The sensitive data can be put on a floppy 
(without a write protect tab).  The large applications can be 
left on the hard disk, with Protect on.  Because the hard disk is 
write protected, but the floppy isn't, the temporary files can 
only be written to the floppy.  All the sensitive data remains on 
the same floppy disk, which can be removed and locked up.
     This version of Protect is based on one which has been used 
for several years by the US Government to protect sensitive 
information.  Using Protect, and a few common sense rules 
(example: no disk with sensitive information is ever (even for a 
second) put in a machine with an unprotected hard disk) one can 
guarantee that protected information will not be left on a fixed 
disk.
     This version of Protect differs from original version in two 
important ways:
a) It protects against a larger number of write disk accesses.  
(See Section 4, How Protect Works, below.)

b) If more than one fixed disk is installed, some disks can be 
write protected while others are not.  This is to support 
removable hard disks.

     Some shortfalls of Protect: 

a) Protect can't unload itself.  It is a TSR which can only be 
removed by rebooting.

b) If the computer is booted from a floppy disk, the hard disk 
may left unprotected.  (See below.)

c) This version of Protect can't protect against disk accesses it 
doesn't know about.  (Future versions of DOS may add new disk 
accesses which change data, making Protect outdated.) 
Note 12 Dec 1992: This includes DOS 5.0

d) Partitions.  It is not possible to protect some partitions and 
leave others unprotected on the same disk.  (See below.)


3. How to Use Protect.

a) Protect all fixed disks.  The first time Protect is run, it 
loads itself into memory, then lists its status.  If called with 
no parameters, it will protect (write protect) every fixed disk 
DOS knows about.  Once all disks are protected, the status can't 
be changed without using Unprot, or rebooting (See note about 
autoexec.bat files, above.)
   Example, protect all fixed disks:
]C:\> protect
]Loading Protection: List of protected physical disks: All.

   To protect all disks if protect has already been loaded,
type "protect a"; example:
]C:\> protect a
]Protection already loaded: List of protected physical disks: All.
    
b) Showing Protects Status.  When run without parameters 
subsequent times, Protect will give a listing of its status. 
   Example, show protection status:
]C:\> protect
]Protection already loaded: List of protected physical disks: All.

c) Protect some fixed disks, but leave the others unprotected.  
Protect accepts a parameter which adds protection for a specific 
*physical* disk.  Once a disk is protected, it can't be 
unprotected, except by unprotecting all disks (with Unprot, or 
rebooting).
   Protect numbers the fixed disks starting at 0.  The boot disk 
is always disk 0.  If there is a second physical disk installed, 
it is disk 1.  Current versions of DOS allow only 2 physical hard 
disks.  However, Protect will allow you to protect up to 7 disks, 
if they exist.
   Example.  Protect the boot disk, but leave any others 
unprotected.  Since Protect is not loaded, it will load itself 
first:
]C:\> protect 0
]Loading Protection: List of protected physical disks: 1

   Example.  Add protection for the second fixed disk: 
]C:\> protect 1
]Loading Protection: List of protected physical disks: 1 0

   It is important to note the difference between a *physical* 
disk and a *logical* disk.  A physical disk is a piece of 
hardware.  A logical disk is an area of a physical disk referred 
to by a drive letter (like C:).  Using the fdisk utility, it is 
possible to partition a physical disk into more than one logical 
disk.  No matter how many partitions are on a disk, there is 
still only one physical disk.
   Protect only deals with physical disks; it knows nothing about 
partitions and logical disks.  It is not possible to protect one 
partition and leave another unprotected on the same physical 
disk.  (Why? In order to make Protect reliable enough to be worth 
while, it must work at the BIOS level.  At the BIOS level, 
logical disks have already been mapped to their respective 
physical disks.  Protect does not know which logical disk was 
accessed, only the physical disk it is on.)

d) Turning Protection Off.  The Unprot program is used to turn 
protection off.  Example:

]C:\> unprot
Protection Off. (But still loaded.)

e) Using Protect in an autoexec.bat file.  Before placing Protect 
in the autoexec.bat file, be sure to have Unprot or a bootable 
floppy disk.  Otherwise, it will be impossible to change the hard 
disk.  Protection will always be on (and it will be impossible to 
edit the autoexec.bat file.)

f) Guaranteeing protection.  Protect must be run to protect the 
disk.  Even if protect is in the autoexec.bat, it may still be 
possible to write to the hard disk under these circumstances:
    1) The computer is booted from a floppy disk without an 
autoexec.bat file.
    2) The computer is booted from a floppy disk without protect 
in the floppy's autoexec.bat file.
    3) The computer is booted from a any disk with protect in the 
disk's autoexec.bat file, but protect is not found in the path.

ALWAYS CHECK FOR THE "Protection loaded..." MESSAGE 

PROTECT CAN ALWAYS BE RUN TO CHECK THE PROTECTION STATUS


4. How Protect Works.
    Protect works by changing the interrupt handler for BIOS 
interrupt 13h.  Interrupt 13h is the Disk I/O Services interrupt.
    Protect makes the change by leaving part of itself in memory.  
(It is a Terminate and Stay Resident program.)  Protect also 
changes the interrupt table so all calls to interrupt 13h go to 
the part of protect left in memory.  Protect examines the disk 
request.  If the request is to an unprotected disk, or is a read, 
Protect then passes the the request to the BIOS, and the request 
happens as if Protect were not there.
    If a disk request would write to a protected disk, Protect 
returns to the caller.  Protect leaves the registers set to the 
same values the BIOS sets them to after an attempt to write to a 
write protected floppy disk (Carry bit, on, 03h in ah).

The disk access which are not allowed to a Protected disk:
  03h: Write a sector. 
  05h: Format a sector.
  06h: Format a track (XT class BIOS only).
  07h: Format the disk (XT class BIOS only).
  0Bh: Write a long sector (DOS diagnostic routine).



